Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya is the main museum in Mumbai, Maharashtra.[3] 
It was founded in the early years of the 20th century by prominent citizens of Mumbai, with the help of the government,
 to commemorate the visit of George V, who was Prince of Wales at the time. It is located in the heart of South Mumbai near
 the Gateway of India. The museum was renamed in 1998 after Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, the founder of Maratha Empire.

The building is built in the Indo-Saracenic style of architecture, incorporating elements of other styles of architecture like
 the Mughal, Maratha and Jain. The museum building is surrounded by a garden of palm trees and formal flower beds.

The museum houses approximately 50,000 exhibits of ancient Indian history as well as objects from foreign lands, categorized primarily
 into three sections: Art, Archaeology and Natural History. The museum houses Indus Valley Civilization artefacts, 
and other relics from ancient India from the time of the Guptas, Mauryas, Chalukyas and Rashtrakuta.

The foundation stone was laid by the Prince of Wales on 11 November 1905 and the museum was formally named "Prince of Wales Museum of Western India".

Location in Mumbai
Established	January 10, 1922
Location	Fort, Mumbai, India
Coordinates	18.926667°N 72.832222°E
Collection size	Approx. 50,000 artefacts

The museum building is situated in 3 acres (12,000 m2) area, having a built up area of 12,142.23m sq.[1] It is surrounded by a garden of palm trees and formal flower beds.[9]

The museum building, built of locally quarried grey Kurla basalt and buff coloured trachyte Malad stone.[10] It is a three-storied rectangular structure, capped by a dome
 set upon a base, which adds an additional storey in the centre of the building. Built in the Western Indian and Indo-Saracenic style of architecture,
 the building accommodates a central entrance porch, above which rises a dome, tilled and modified well "tiled in white and blue flecks, 
supported on a lotus - petal base". A cluster of pinnacles, topped with miniature domes surround the central dome. 
The building incorporates features like Islamic dome with a finial along with protruding balconies and inlaid floors, 
inspired by Mughal palace architecture. The architect, George Wittet, modeled the dome on that of Golconda Fort and 
the inner vaulting arches on those at the Gol Gumbaz in Bijapur.[9][11] The interior of the museum combines the columns,
 railings and balcony of an 18th-century Wada (a Maratha mansion) with Jain style interior columns, which form the main body of the central pavilion below the Maratha balcony.[11]

Archaeological section
Sculptures and coins transferred from the Poona Museum in Pune and the collections of the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
resulted in the development of an archaeological section, with precious sculptures and epigrams.[9] The Indus Valley Culture Gallery houses 
fishing hooks, weapons, ornaments and weights and measures from the Indus Valley Civilization (2600–1900 BCE).[12] Artefacts from the excavation of
 the Buddhist stupa of Mirpurkhas, were housed in the Museum in 1919.[1] The sculpture collection holds Gupta (280 to 550 CE) terracotta figures from
 Mirpurkhas in Sind of the early 5th century, artefacts dating to the Chalukyan era (6th-12th century, Badami Chalukyas and Western Chalukyas), 
and sculptures of the Rashtrakuta period (753 – 982 CE) from Elephanta, near Mumbai.[9]

The art section displays the collections of Sir Purushottam Mavji, acquired in 1915, and the art collections of Sir Ratan Tata and Sir Dorab Tata, donated in 1921 and 1933 respectively.[9]


Dancing Krishna, from the Nepal-Tibet section. Nepal, 18th century AD. The headphone symbol at the foot of the image indicates that the artifact is part of the audio tour. 
The museum provides an audio tour in six languages to visitor's.[1]
The museum's miniature collection encompasses representations of the main schools of Indian painting namely, Mughal, Rajasthani, Pahari and Deccani. 
It features palm leaf manuscripts dating to the 11th-12th centuries to the early 19th century pahari paintings, as well as paintings from the Sultanate period.[9]
 Notable manuscripts housed in the museum include the Anwar-Suhayli painted in Mughal emperor Akbar’s studio and a 17th-century manuscript of the Hindu epic Ramayana from Mewar.[12]

The ivory section has artefacts dating as early as the Gupta era.[9]
 The museum also has decorative artefacts such as textiles, ivories, Mughal jades, silver, gold and artistic metal ware. 
It also has a collection of European paintings, Chinese and Japanese porcelain, ivory and jade artefacts.[9]
 The museum also has sections dedicated to arms and armour and another to Nepali and Tibetan art. 
The arms and armour section contains a finely decorated armour of Akbar dating to 1581 CE, consisting of a steel breastplate and a shield, the former inscribed with religious verses.

The archaeological collections were originally started by pioneering archaeologists Sir Henry Cousens and Sir John Marshall. Amongst the important sculptures are the Gupta period terracotas and bricks from Mirpurkhas excavated by Cousens, a large number of Buddhist images from Gandhara and ceiling panels from a dilapidated temple at Aihole. The early examples are from Pauni and Pitalkhora. Mumbai itself has a rich tradition exemplified by the colossal Parel Relief of Shiva (represented here by a cast) and a Matrika from Baijanath Temple at Sewri near Parel belonging to the same phase as Elephanta. Other noteworthy images from Maharashtra are a Vishnu and a Ganesha of the eleventh century CE. Some well known sculptures are:

Brahma, from Elephanta Caves
Mahishasuramardini, from Elephanta
Parel Relief of Shiva (plaster cast) from Parel
Sculptures from Aihole and Pattadakkal
Dvarapala, from Shamalji, Gujarat
Garuda, from the Konark Sun Temple
Yaksha, from Pitalkhora
Buddha and Devotee from Mirpur Khas
Ashthamahesha Replica bust

It is a Grade I Heritage Building of the city and is set in a well laid out garden which retains its original plan. 
It has been awarded first place for Heritage Building Maintenance by the Indian Heritage Society.




what is artifact??????
    any object made by human beings, especially with a view to subsequent use. a handmade object, as a tool, or the remains of one, as a shard of pottery, characteristic of an earlier time or cultural stage, especially such an object found at an 
archaeological excavation.


Timings: 10:15 AM - 5:00 PM, Open on all days except Monday
Entry fee INR 30
You have the option of taking audio guides which offer great information in English and seven other languages
The Museum is at a 20 - minute walking distance from both major local railway terminuses, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (Central Railway) and Churchgate (Western Railway)

NEW GALLERIES:
An exhibition entitled Pravaha highlighting early phase of Sir J.J. School of Art and the Progressive Art Movement 
was launched on 24 July 2017. The exhibition covered a range of paintings from the 1880s to 1950s through works of Pestonji Bomanji,
 Rustom Siodia, Salvalaram Haldankar, Antonio Trindade, S. N. Gorakshakar, Govind Mahadev Solegaonkar, G. H. Nagarkar, J. M. Ahivasi,
 Raghunath Dhondopant Dhopeshwarkar, Raghuveer Govind Chimulkar, Rasiklal Parikh and Y. K. Shukla, Abalal Rahiman, Keshav Bhavanrao Chudekar, 
Lakshman Narayan Taskar, Syed Haider Raza, and Krishnaji Howlaji Aara.[14][15]

A prints gallery was launched with an exhibition entitled Bombay to Mumbai - Door of the East with its face to the West on 29 January 2015.
 The gallery was inaugurated by Neil MacGregor, Director of the British Museum in London, who also gave an illustrated lecture on 'World Cultures' at the central foyer of the museum.

As part of the renovation project initiated in October 2008, the Krishna Gallery holding artworks related to the Hindu god Krishna, a Hindu deity
 of the preserver-god Vishnu, was opened in March 2009.

A textile gallery, the first gallery in the city, was opened in April 2010. It illustrates "various techniques of textile manufacturing,
 regional collections and traditional Indian costumes".[2]

Matrika Design Collaborative is currently designing the museum's Indian miniature painting gallery.
 The content developed for the gallery will be converted into Braille text and tactile labels for the blind with help from designers,
 fabricators and consultants from the Helen Keller Institute.

A new gallery on traditional Indian jewellery will be opening in 2020. At the gallery, there will be an exhibit on Golconda diamonds -
 replicas of which have been presented to the museum.

Musee d’Orsay, France
Vatican Museums, Vatican City
Museum Island, Berlin
The National 9/11 Memorial and Museum, New York
National Rail Museum, Delhi
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya,mumbai
